Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricard Lops, and today I'm
joined by Doctor Michael Levin. He is distinguished professor
in the biology department at Van Vannevar Bush, chair,
as well as director of the Tuft Center for
Generative and Developmental Biology at Tufts University. And today
we're going to talk about topics like living systems,
the self morphology, collective intelligence, sentience, regenerative medicine, and
more so, Doctor Levin, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to everyone.
Yeah, thanks for having me. Yeah, nice to meet
you.
So, let me first ask you, what is a
living system?
Well, uh, to be honest, and, and this may
be strange for a biologist to say, uh, I
don't spend much time thinking about the definition of
life, actually. Um, I'm much more interested in the
spectrum of cognition, which I think is actually is
a broader category than, uh, than the set of
living things. But if we wanted to define it,
I think what we would focus on our Uh,
those cognitive systems that first of all, self-assemble, and
in particular, they self-assemble under metabolic constraints of uh
scarcity of time and energy and things like that,
uh, which demands a coarse graining and, uh, agential
models of the outside world in itself and so
on. We would talk about, uh, systems that need
to uh interpret their own memories where their own,
uh, the, the Ngrams or the, the traces of
past experience, uh, at any one moment need to
be, need to be interpreted to decide what, what
to do next. I think we would focus on
the ability of life to, um, scale up the
agency of its components and project them into new
problem spaces, may basically enlarge their, their cognitive life,
uh, like cognitively. I think that life is fundamentally
a kind of, uh, vulnerable system that is fundamentally
oriented forward in time in terms of decision making
and, uh, doing the best they can under the
circumstances that it has. Um, THAT'S, those, those are
the things I focus on. I mean, clearly, uh,
there are many conventional definitions around thermodynamics and evolutionary
change and things like that, but these are the
sorts of things that, um, that I focus on.
And what is the self in the context of
biology?
Yeah. Uh, I think, I think a useful definition
of a, of a self and I, and, and
for all these definitions, you know, we have to
ask what, what is the use that we get
out of these, right? All, all these terms have
to provide some sort of, some sort of benefit
in terms of research and discovery. I think that
a useful definition of a self is, um, the,
uh, the owner of specific goals, preferences, and memories
that don't belong to their parts. It's a kind
of emergent hole that is formed by, um, a
sort of mutually interlocked triad of an option space
within which it operates. So some kind of problem
space, um, a, a defined cognitive light cone of
goals. So the size of the biggest goals that
it can work towards. So this is very much
a, a, a definition that relies on. Uh, uh,
ACTIVE agents having goals and having goal-directed behaviors, so
the size of the goals and, um, some degree
of, uh, competency to achieve those goals under various,
um, various circumstances. Selves fundamentally live forward in time
their, their decision-making systems that are not well described
by deterministic backwards-looking models in terms of uh focusing
on the molecular components and why certain things happen.
Um, SELVES arise when Uh, a collection of parts
basically adopts the same, uh, the same way of
understanding the world and functions together to solve problems.
Uh, SORT of related to the topic of self.
Why would you say planaria are such interesting organisms?
Are they really multicellular organisms or not?
Uh, WELL, I do think they're multicellular organisms. Um,
THERE, there are many fascinating things about planaria. Let
me, let me describe a few. So first of
all just to see what, what planaria are. So
these are, um, free living, uh, flat worms that
are probably about 1 centimeter or so in, in
length. They have a nervous system, they have a
centralized brain, um, and, uh, they're true bilearians. They're
similar to our ancient ancestor and They have several
amazing properties. 11 remarkable property they have is that
they can regenerate. So if you cut them into
pieces, or in fact, when they reproduce, they tear
themselves in half and then they, and they regenerate
and you can cut them into many pieces. So,
one of the consequences of reproduction where instead of
using a sperm and egg, and, and some types
of plenary certainly do sexual reproduction, but I'm, I'm
referring to the ones that are asexual. So the
asexual strains tear themselves in half and then they
regenerate. And so one consequence of that is that
uh Somatic mutations, mutations that occur in the body,
um, don't disappear into the for the next lineage,
the way they do with us, right? If you
have a mutation, the children don't inherit the mutation
from your body. But in planaria, every mutation that
doesn't kill the stem cell moves forward and is
in fact is amplified as the animal regenerates. So
for 400+ million years, they've been accumulating uh somatic
mutations. They can be mixed upployed, meaning that their
cells can have different numbers of chromosomes, their, their
genes. ARE a mess somatically, they're, they're, they're very
messy. And yet they are incredibly reliable regenerators. They
are highly cancer resistant and they are immortal. There,
there appears to be no such thing as a,
as an old planaria in these um asexual strains.
They don't age. Now, That seems very, very strange.
You would, you would, uh, you would think from,
from, from the standard things you learn in biology
that, that the genome is very important and that
the animal with the messiest genome would not in
fact be the one that's the most regenerative cancer
resistant and, uh, and, and, um, and immortal. And
yet, and yet here we are. So, so I,
I think, uh, there's a very interesting story to
be told about planaria, and it has to do
with the way that Uh, evolution produces problem solving
agents and what's happening, I think, in, in planaria
is that because the material is so unreliable, the
hardware is more than most organisms. So because of
this mutation, uh, mutation accumulation and so on. Uh,
WHAT, and, and we, and we've actually studied this,
this kind of, uh, this kind of feedback loop
and computational studies. What happens is that when you
have a material like this, uh, evolution really spends
a lot of its effort on creating a system
that can get The job done, meaning can, can
achieve specific goals in anatomical space and physiological space
and so on, even under drastically changing circumstances when
your own parts change, right? When your material is
unreliable. And I think in Planary, that algorithm is
so, is so good and it's, it, it had
to be. That basically they're able to, uh, create
a, a normal plenary despite really a very wide
variety of, of, of fun of genetically specified hardware.
Now, 11 interesting, uh, uh, prediction, which is, which
is actually true, turns out to be true of
that, of that model is that it, it should
be very hard to make transgenic planaria. And because,
because, because the, the basically the algorithm is, is
designed to ignore um errors in the, in the
genome and just do what it, what it does.
And in fact, that's true. Most other species, you
can call a stock center and you can get
a fruit fly with curly wings or a mouse
with a with a weird tail or weird coat
color or something. Uh, IN planaria, there are no
genetic strains. There are no genetic mutants. There, there
is, there, there, there is one type of unusual
planaria strain that has two heads, and that's one
we made and it's not genetic. And, and, and
this is, you know, this is, um, uh, the,
the, the reason that the planaria, I think, are
so interesting is that they're teaching us something very
profound about, uh, how, how evolution works and how
that relates to the genetically specified hardware of life.
And where does the morphology of different organisms come
from? What determines determines it?
Well, that's, that's an interesting, uh, question, because the
word, uh, comes from, uh, bears some, some analysis.
So what does it mean when outcomes come from
something? Uh, I'll give you a simple, well, 2222
examples. And then, and then I'll, I'll answer about
the biology. One example is, um, uh, I don't
know if you've ever seen this thing called the
Galton board. It's basically, and you can buy a
toy of this on Amazon for $20. It's basically,
just imagine a wooden board and you bang a
bunch of nails into it like this, right? And
then you take a bucket of. AND you dump
it dump it on top and the marbles go
boom, boom boom, you know, they bounce off and
they land on the bottom. What what what how
do they land? Well, they land in a beautiful
bell curve. It's a very specific shape every single
time. As long as you have enough marbles, you
get a very beautiful distribution. You get a bell
curve. So you might ask that question, where does
the bell curve, where does that come from? So,
if, if, if you're inclined to, uh, look at
the materials of the wood, of the nails, of
the, you know, you're, you're not going to find
it. It doesn't come from any of those things
in the sense of, uh, here is where the
plan is, is, is sort of written down and
then, then there, you know, there it is. So
there's something else, there's something else going on here.
And another, another way to think about it too
is that if you, if you plot um something
called the Halley plot of a very simple formula,
let's say uh Z cubed plus 7 there, that's
just a few characters. There's your formula in complex
numbers, you can plot the Halley plot. You get
this incredibly Beautiful fractal structure. It looks very biological.
It's very beautiful shape. Uh, NOW, now you asked
the question, where does that shape come from? What
aspect of, of, of physics, of the environment, of,
of the past history explains where that shape comes
from. It's none of those things, right? None, none
of those things control it. So, in terms of
biological shape, I'm going to say there are 3
things that really go into it. One is, of
course, uh, the genetically provided hardware, which is basically
what, uh, what the, what the genome provides every
cell with, which is a set of proteins that
the cells have to have. There is the, uh,
the, the, the current environment, which is, uh, the,
the, the situation that the cells find themselves in,
and within that situation, that hardware is usually pretty
good at making something coherent happen. It may be
the standard embryo, it may be one of several
um uh different. Shapes in terms of developmental plasticity.
It might be a Xenabbot or an antherbot or
something else, but, you know, something, something useful will
happen. And the third very important thing that, that
a lot of people don't talk about. So we've
got, we've got the, the heredity, we've got the
environment, and, and the third very important thing is
the input from Uh, wherever it is that the
law of mathematics come from. Some people call it
the, you know, Platonic space or the space of
forms. We don't have a great vocabulary for it
yet, but it's, it's, it's really important. There's, there's
very, uh, fundamentally, functionally important. Information that is not
physical, it's not encoded by any uh aspects of
physics in our world. And, and nevertheless, it has
a huge input into uh shape and behavior of,
of living forms because evolution really exploits the information
in that space a lot.
So you're very interested in cognition. What is the
most basic level at, at which cognition arises?
Well, uh, first of all, first of all, let's,
let's try to define terms. So, uh, 11 thing
that I'm very interested in is, is intelligence and
the definition that I use, and I'm not saying
this is the only definition or the best definition,
uh, or even a complete definition, but what I
focus on is problem solving. That doesn't include play
and creativity and, and some other things, but, but
let's, let's just talk about problem solving. So, what
I'm, what I'm interested in is uh first of
all, the origin of the kind of uh intelligence
that that advanced systems have. Where does it come
from, right? Because we know, you, you and I
were both single cells once, right? We were both
on the evolutionary scale and on the developmental scale.
We were in, uh, uh, a little unfertilized oy,
a little blob of chemical. Many people look at
that and say, well, that's just the chemical physical
system. There is no cognition there. And yet, slowly
and gradually through the process of development, here we
are. So, what we need to do is we,
we need to understand how the properties of these,
uh, physical chemical systems scale up to the kind
of problem solving that is obvious for us to
recognize. So we study in problem solving and different
aspects of cognition, meaning memory and, uh, and, uh,
preferences and, and the goal directedness and so on.
We study these things in a very wide range
of model systems in very diverse spaces. So, in
physiological states, based in, in, in the space of
anatomical um states. So we, we look at how
cells and multicellular tissue solve problems in 3. The
anatomical space and so on. Um, SO, so once
we, once we develop the tools to, uh, uh,
detect and, and measure and, uh, quantify those kind
of competencies in different spaces, right? Then, then we
can really ask how far down does it go?
So what are the simplest, uh, versions of that?
What are the lowest kind of, uh, uh, examples
of that. So, um, I, I, I think that
one of the things that You want to think
about when you're, when you're um trying, trying to
quantify these kinds of, uh, these kind of properties
is autonomy. So, as, and, and I take a
very engineering approach to this, you, you have an
autonomous subsystem based on what can you rely on
it to do when you're not there to micromanage
it. So, that might be a thermostat circuit, it
might be, you know, something more complex. But everything
is built up from, from pieces, and we need
to understand how much autonomy do these pieces have
to solve certain problems without being micromanaged. So, under,
under that kind of definition, It, I, I think
we can argue that at least in this universe,
uh, the spectrum of agency goes all the way
down to the, the, the smallest, uh um uh
the smallest particles because what it looks like there
is least action laws. Basically, uh, The, um, the
simplest version of, of goal-directed activity, I think, are
the, are the least action principles. And as a,
as a very simple example, think about, um, uh,
as a, as an engineer, think about building a
roller coaster. You have to do a lot of
work to get the thing up the, up the
hill, right? But you don't have to do anything
to get it back down the hill. Now, that's
not super intelligent. It's not very intelligent, but it's
something. It's not zero. It is something that you
can rely on the system to do. Without you
having to manage it. So the ability to to,
to fall down gradients is the most primitive kind
of intelligence there is. Obviously, we're interested in bigger,
you know, more, more, more impressive systems, but, but
just following gradients is already something. I think it's
on the spectrum and, and even particles do that.
So I think it goes all the way down.
But then you have, you know, the thing that
life is good at is scaling up those kinds
of properties to show all kinds of more advanced
things that people typically recognize. So following gradients in
a more clever way, delayed gratification, navigation, memory, pathfinding,
uh, uh, maybe eventually forward planning and, and, and,
you know, counterfactual thinking, all, all these things. All
of these things are on the same spectrum, and
they go all the way down to the, to,
to what we currently call inanimate matter.
So, you've mentioned the intelligence there. What is collective
intelligence and how does it apply in the context
of a living system?
Yeah, collective intelligence is basically the property of a
system to be able to solve problems in spaces
that uh are different from what it's parts to.
So, um, so people typically study collective intelligence in,
uh, colonies of ants and, and termites and, and
bees and then flock bird flocks and actually robot
swarms and, and things like that. But we are
all collective intelligences. You and I are also collective
intelligences because we are made of a collection of
parts, uh, cells, which are by themselves quite competent.
But these cells are by themselves solving problems in
physiological state space, in gene expression space, and so
on. And they, there is a, there are a
set of uh uh policies which we can talk
about, including bioelectrics and some other things that enable
these cells to come together in a way where
the collective that they make is able to solve
problems in the new space that the parts don't
have access to. And so you can imagine during,
during evolution that originally systems have to deal with
um some kind of metabolic space, and then they
became more complex and they, and they could operate
it. Physiological space and the genes came along and
they could operate in transcriptional space. And then multicellularity
came along, and now the whole thing can, can
operate in anatomical space. Now, when you have a
salamander and it loses a limb, those cells will
very quickly rebuild the correct limb and then they
stop. OK. Uh, SO, so that's, that's, that's an
error minimization scheme. They're able to Find again that
correct uh location in the anatomical space when they're
deviated from it by some kind of injury, and
no individual cell in that collective knows what a
finger is or how many fingers it's supposed to
have, but the collective absolutely knows. And you know
that it knows because if you, if you, if
you cut off the, you know, some number of
fingers, it will build back exactly what's needed, and
then it stops. It stops when it reaches the
goal. So the individual parts don't have that, but
the collective does. And then Eventually, uh, nerve and
muscle came on the scene and then, and then
we could pursue what uh behavioral goals, right? So
moving around in three dimensional space to create behavioral
goals. And now we have linguistic paths through the
linguistic space that that humans can take and, and,
and many other kinds of goals that we can
do. So, Uh, collective intelligence is, is, is simply
this, it's the ability to bind competent subunits together
in a way that the group is able to
solve new problems in a new space.
And how does collective intelligence play out in the
morphogenesis of multicellular organisms?
Well, yeah, that's that one of the, one of
the most interesting kinds of collective intelligence that we
see is problem solving in anatomical space. So, you
have, uh, a bunch of cells, the cells themselves
are able to do all sorts of things, as
we can see from amoebas and from various other
kinds of cells, but together, they're actually, um, Able
to, to solve problems in, in a, in a
very different space, which is the space of three
dimensional shapes. So let me describe, um, let me
describe uh what some of those problems are. So,
so first of all, we can just start right
with embryonic development, uh, many kinds of embryos, if
you cut them into pieces. You don't get half
bodies, you get perfectly normal monozygotic twins and triplets
and so on. So, so even, even this is
regulative development and even when certain parts are, are
damaged, the system can recognize that that's happened, uh,
make up what it do, take, take steps that
it needs to do and get to where it's
going. Another kind of example is Um, in the,
in the frog tadpole that has to rearrange its
cranio facial organs to go from tadpole to frog.
If you, you might think that this is a
hardwired kind of process where every particular, uh, organ
in the face just moves in the right direction,
the right amount, and then you get a normal
frog. But actually, it turns out that's not true.
What we discovered when we, uh, randomized the position
of the organs, right? So, so the eyes on
the back of the head, the mouth is off
to the side, just scramble everything, you still get
a normal frog. And the reason you get a
normal frog is that these things are not following
predetermined paths. They're trying to minimize error from a,
a configuration that they remember, not the individual cells,
but the collective. And And they will continue to
move and rearrange and deform and whatever until they
get to this, to this pattern. So all of,
all, and there are many, many other examples that
we could talk about, but all of these are
examples of, uh, specific problem solving, including use of,
uh, you know, I could tell you examples where
they use, uh, different molecular, um, tools that they
have in their toolkit to solve a problem when
things really radically change. And that creative, creative reuse
of the hardware you have, I mean, that's basically
intelligence. And it's, and, and so the ability to
remember our goal, work hard to get to that
goal, despite changing circumstances, and creatively use the tools
you have to try to get there even in
cases of, uh, where you've not seen this problem
before. Those are all intelligences, uh, kinds of intelligence,
I should say, and, um, It's a collective intelligence
because it's being carried out by a swarm of
cells that they're all committed to the same uh
traversal of that problem space towards the same goal.
So in your work, when it comes to development,
I read about the concept of multi-scale competency. Could
you explain it?
Yeah, this is, this is, uh, what I mean
by that is that every level of organization has
its own ability to solve problems in different spaces.
So, for example, one talk that I give sometimes
is, is called Why Robots Don't Get Cancer. And
the reason current robots don't get cancer is because
the collective, the, the, the final thing, the robot
itself might be intelligent and it might be solving
certain problems, but it's typically made of dumb parts.
The parts themselves don't have an agenda. Um, IN,
in, in, uh, living forms, that's not the case.
We're made of an agential material where every part
and every scale has its own. Um, SET of
goals and preferences and agendas that it's trying to
meet. So the molecular networks themselves have a kind
of learning and memory and goal directedness that they're
able to do. The cells can, can solve problems
in various spaces, the tissues, the organs, the whole
organism, and then, of course, swarms and groups and
so on. So at every, at every level of
organization, you don't have uh purely um Uh, passive,
passive materials, you have, you have, uh, any genial
material that has all these amazing competencies that can
be taken advantage of by the higher levels of
organization. And, and, and it is. That's what, that's,
that's, that's a key principle of life. And, uh,
that's, that's, that's the multi-scale competency architecture. I think
we're built of an architecture where every every level
is competent in certain cases.
And how do cells, tissues and organs adjust to
perturbations such as external injury or internal modifications and
still accomplish adaptive tasks?
Yeah, I mean, that's, that's uh a a a
huge question. It's really critical for understanding evolution, development,
for developing regenerative medicine, um. You know, there, there's,
there's a few interests. I'll, I'll just, I, I'll
give a few interesting examples. Um, AND, and, and,
and we're starting to understand some of that because,
because what you need to do in order to
understand that is to identify what I call the
cognitive glue, that is the mechanisms that bind individual
cells together towards common purpose. And we've now started
to identify some of those and bioelectrics is, is,
of course, one of them, but, but there's a
few others, uh, including stress sharing and, and memory
anonymization and so on. So, Uh, so, so, so,
so here's a, here's a few examples, um. Uh,
IN, in the, in the newt, there's a, there's
a little tube that goes to the kidney, OK,
this little kidney tubule. And if you take a
cross section of a normal kidney tubule, what you'll
see is 8 to 10 cells making a, you
know, making a little circle, right? That's the cross
section, and, and now you get your tube. So,
one thing you can do is you can make
these polyploid nodes, which have Uh, extra copies of
their, of their genetic material, right? So instead of
2nnus, you can make 4 and 5 and 6,
and so on. When you do that, first thing
that happens is the cells get larger to accommodate
additional genetic material. So the cell size adapts to
the amount of DNA. The second thing you notice
is that you still get a perfectly good nut.
So that's interesting. It kind of doesn't matter how
many copies of your genetic material you have, you
can still make it, make a good nut. The
third thing that happens is you notice that because
the cells are bigger, But the node is exactly
the same size. So when you take a cross
section, you see how that works. Fewer cells are
now making up that same tubule. So now it's
adjusted to the size of the, uh, to the,
to the, uh, to the new size of the
cells, not just the, right? And so, and then,
and then the The most amazing thing is that
if you make them, if you make the cells
truly gigantic, uh, just one cell will wrap around
itself and leave a hole in the middle and
give you that same tubule. Now, in that case,
that's a completely different molecular mechanism, that's cytoskeletal bending.
The others were some kind of cell to cell
communication. So what you see here, is exactly the
sort of problem solving that I was talking about
where if you're a nude coming into this world,
what can you count on? Well, you know your
environment is going to change, but you also can't
even count on your own parts. You don't know
how many copies of your genome you're going to
have. You don't know what size or how many
cells you're going to have. You have to use
whatever tools you have, in particular, all of these
molecular cascades that that have to do with the
cytoskeletal bending and cell to cell communication and so
on. You have to use them as best as
you can. To complete your journey in anatomical space.
And you have to do this on the fly.
So, so it isn't like you can, you can
do a bunch of computations and then those computations
impact some other system. You have to do all
those computations while you are changing your own architecture.
Yeah. And the same, the same thing happens. In,
um, for example, the butterfly caterpillar, uh, transition, where,
where when you have a caterpillar, and it, in
order to become a butterfly, it basically dissolves most
of its brain and then rebuilds a new brain
that's, um, that's, that's much more suitable for, uh,
for living in a three-dimensional world. Um, IT'S been
shown that some of the memories of the caterpillar
actually remain and, and, and, and are actually, they,
they don't just remain, actually remapped into the kind
of memories that are useful to a butterfly, which
are quite different. So again, you have the scenario
where you not only have to stay alive, but
you also have to manage your own transformation while
doing the, the relevant computations and holding on to
information and remapping that information onto the new substrate.
So, so all of these transformational processes are very
much, um, recurrent. They're very much, uh, kind of
self, self-referential. It's a, it's a, it's basically a
machine that changes itself on the fly because it
is a problem solving agent from, from the very
beginning.
Mhm. So tell us now, to get into the
topic of sentience, uh, tell us now about your
theme or technological approach to mind everywhere framework to
understanding bodies, minds, and intelligences.
Yeah, um, so, so what I'm interested in is
developing ways to think about all different kinds of
agents, regardless of their composition or how they got
here. In other words, I want to be able
to ask, uh, in particular, what is, what is
common to all agents, be they evolved biologicals, like
the familiar animals, or maybe some weird animals like,
like, uh, Um, swarms and things like that, but
also synthetic, uh, synthetic living beings, biobots, um, hybrids
and cyborgs, and, uh, uh, embodied robotics and AI
software agents, someday maybe exobiological, alien life, all of
it. I want to understand what all of these
things have in common. And in particular, this framework
is uh designed to, to do that and Uh,
to do it in a very, uh, practical way.
That is, I'm not just interested in philosophy. I
don't want to, um, have debates about the word
usage and try to prop up ancient categories of
what life is, what machines are, what robots are.
I think the, the, the useful thing for us
to do now. IS to, uh, assume that all
of those kinds of claims about sentience, about intelligence,
about cognition, all of those claims are basically just
interaction protocols, meaning, meaning I want to operationalize all
of these things and say that those terms are
useful to the extent that they help me interact
with the system. So that That means if I
want to understand the collective intelligence of cells, I
may have models of what kind of intelligence they
have, and those models have to help me get
to new therapeutics. They have to make new predictions.
They have to unlock new, uh, capabilities that we
didn't have. Otherwise, otherwise it's useless. So, so that,
so, so the goal of the framework is To
help us to recognize, to, uh, control or collaborate
with very unusual diverse intelligences that I think are
all around us, and, and we just, we're not
very good at recognizing them and do it in
a way that enables us to have more fruitful,
more ethical interactions with them. So this means biomedicine
and has certain environmental implications and so on. And
so, and so this, this framework has a number
of pillars. One is that, uh, We need to
think beyond ancient categories, uh, that were OK in
sort of pre-scientific times, but are really not supported
by, by discoveries of evolution of developmental biology of
bioengineering. I think a lot of these categories are
no good, and we need to develop new, um,
new, new, new frameworks for asking what kind of
relationship can you have with a specific system? What
does it do? Does it learn? Does it have
goals, how much, uh, what kind of, uh, problem
solving it can do, and so on. Um. Uh,
THERE are also, there are also some other components
such as polycomputing, which is the, uh, the idea
that, that everything is, is described from the perspective
of some observer and that multiple observers can be
interpreting the same physical events as very different computations.
So everything is observer relative. I think that's important.
Um, AND, uh, you know, there's, there's some other
components such as being able to use the framework
of the cognitively cone for any given system to
be able to say what are the, what are
the scale and, uh, in both in space and
time of the largest goal that it can pursue,
right? So, so what, what is, what is the
system concerned about? What are the, what are the
goals that it's actively trying to manage? And I
think those are ways that we can, we can
start to think about very, very diverse, uh, agential
systems.
But when it comes to sentience specifically, how can
we infer it in other organisms including animals and
possibly also plants?
What, what do you mean by sentience exactly?
Uh, I, I mean, let me ask you, by
the way, what, what is sentience?
Well, I, I don't use that word much. I
don't know really exactly what it means. I mean,
part, part of the issue is that we often
use a lot of terminology that is not clear
to me what, um, practical, practical use it has.
So, so I'm not sure, I'm not sure what
we can do with, with sentience. I think that,
uh, in general, this, this notion of a system
that is, uh, functionally. Navigating some kind of environment
to meet goals that it has preferences towards and
away from, from certain goals that is able to
solve problems that represents the environment in a, uh,
in a compact, uh, kind of way, the way
that we do when we make models. That, that's,
that, that's what I'm interested in. And in various
spaces, uh, that's a very functional. Um, THAT'S a
very functional kind of thing which you can test
with, with experiments. And the way you do it
both in, in animals and plants, and in lots
of very, I mean we study very minimal systems
that are, that are far, quote unquote below plants
in the standard scheme of things, that also have
these properties, you know, uh, the very simple systems
can have some of these properties, and the way
you do it is with experiments. So that means
that You specify some kind of problem space as
you hypothesize a problem space, you hypothesize what goal
it has, you hypothesize what. Uh, COMPETENCY, it has
to reach those goals, and then you do functional
experiments to test those hypotheses, meaning you put barriers
between it and its goal, or you, um, uh,
just disrupt various things and see, and see what
in fact competencies it has to reach, to reach
those goals. And that's, that's an experimental, uh, platform
with which we can get good objective answers to
these questions, because if you have different hypotheses about
what the system is or different degrees of, um,
if you, if you want to Attribute to a
different degrees of, of cognition than I do, we
can both do experiments and show what does, what
does each of our models allow us to do.
And so this is something that, for example, we
do in regenerative medicine. A lot of people will
automatically assume that that cells and tissues have zero
or very low, uh, kinds of, uh, cognitive capacities,
and that has certain implications. It means that you,
you know, that therapeutics must operate bottom up on
the molecular hardware and very specific techniques. We have
a different approach where, where we've hypothesized that actually
the systems could do these other things, for example,
have certain kinds of memory, uh, uh, certain kinds
of preferences, and so on. And that enables us
to use very different set of tools from, uh,
from behavioral science and from cognitive neuroscience. And by
using those tools, we've shown that, hey, look, we
can get to new capabilities that you couldn't get
to with the, with the original framework. So that's
it. It's, it's an objective, uh, standard scientific way
to judge the quality of the different, uh, sets
of tools that, that we use. Now, That does
not address quote unquote, the hard problem of consciousness.
That is what I'm talking about is publicly observable
behavior. And so, if that's what you mean by
sentience, then it's, then it's, then, then we know
how to do it. We do, we do experiments
and, and we see uh what kind of Models
of, of representation of memory of decision making are
actually useful in, in research and then, and then
we all find out um how, how you know
about the first, the first person experience of these
systems, that's a completely different question and that's a
much harder question.
Uh, CAN AI have a mind?
Well, like Turing said, you need to, uh, you
need to define all the terms here. You need
to define AI, you need to define mind, and
you probably need to define can. Uh, I, I'll
I'll, I'll, I'll say a few things about it.
First of all, let's be clear that none of
this is about today's AI, right? So, so I'm,
I'm thinking much more, much more broadly about various,
um. Official beings that that all either already exist
or are soon going to exist, which include not
only embodied robotics, but also various hybrids and and
and combinations of living tissue with engineered artifacts and
software. So if you, you know, we are, we
already do and we will much more so have
various cyborgs. YOU know, humans walking around that are
maybe, you know, 80% human, 20%, uh, some, you
know, some other kind of engineered implant or vice
versa. And what I really don't like are these
binary framings, you know, can it or can't it?
Because what you're soon going to be in a
position of is, is trying to, when, you know,
when confronted by somebody that says, yes, you know,
about 50% human and the rest of me is,
is engineered. You, you don't want to be in
a position of trying to say, well, is it
51% or 49%, because that's how we're going to
decide if you're, you know, if you're, if you're
an AI or a human. I mean, this, this
is a, you know, it's a pseudo problem that's,
that's, that's never going to be useful. So, um,
what I think is that I see absolutely no
reason why the random vagaries of evolution should have
a monopoly on making minds. We, we, we know
that, that, that over billions of years, the cosmic
rays and various other things that, uh, that affect,
um, the materials of life have enabled intelligence and,
and the first person. Experience to, uh, to project
into the physical world. Why should that be the
only way it happens? Why, why can't the same
process occur when the body is, is, is built
not by random chance and selection, but actually by
the forethought of, of intelligent engineers? I see, I
see no reason why, why evolution should have a
monopoly on this. So to the extent that You
believe that living things made of, made of chemicals,
uh, do, do in fact have mines, then some
combination of those things with technology, or in fact,
just purely technological bodies that were carefully designed by
intelligent engineers, not by stray random cosmic rays, should
have at least that level of, uh, of capability.
So some, so, so, so some kinds of artificial
beings, I think absolutely will have minds. I'm not
making any claims about today's AI such as language
models and whatnot, but, um, I, I don't, I
don't think there is any useful category, uh, that
we can say does not have a mind purely
because it is in some sense artificial, that, that,
uh, you know, I don't think that exists.
So changing topics now, what is regenerative medicine?
Well, broadly speaking, regenerative medicine is the idea that.
We could be, uh, activating fundamental repair processes in
the body to, to, to have definitive solutions to
things like birth defects, traumatic injury, cancer, aging, that,
that we're not simply providing some kind of a,
uh, uh, uh, a therapeutic that targets symptoms, but
actually restoring the tissue to, to a new and
healthy state. So permanent definitive solutions to, uh, problems
of embodiment.
And OK, so how can we apply, we talked
about collective intelligence earlier, particularly in living systems. How
can we apply knowledge about it to the development
of a new medicine?
Yeah, uh, well, the first thing to realize is
that if we had the ability to control what
it is that cells build, right? If we have
the ability to tell them exactly what to build,
we would immediately have the answer to, to birth
defects, to, uh, to injury, to degenerative disease, to
aging, to cancer. All, all of those things would
be solved if we could, uh, tell cells what
to build. Now, One way to think about it,
which is, which is kind of the mainstream approach
is that we should focus on the molecular hardware.
So this is genomic editing, pathway engineering, you know,
pathway rewiring, protein engineering, all those things. And, and
that that's how we're going to do it. That's,
that's one approach. I, I, I don't think that's
the best approach. Uh, THE other approach is to
realize that the, the process by which the cells
build and repair those structures in the first place
is a kind of behavior. It's the behavior of
the collective intelligence of cells, and therefore, we should
be able to use some very powerful tools from
behavioral science, from cognitive neuroscience, and so on, to
manipulate the behavior of that creature to basically communicate
and collaborate with it, not try to micromanage it
bottom up. So, our approach to regenerative medicine and,
and we've had now useful applications in, in, in
birth defects in er in limb regeneration and cancer
and so on, is to uh figure out uh
what the interfaces for, for communicating new goals to
the cellular collective. Uh, AND then re-specifying those goals.
So not trying to clamp uh specific chemical states,
uh, to deal with symptoms, but actually to re-specify,
uh, new goal states having to do with healthy,
uh, structure and function, and then facilitate the cells
to move towards those, those goal states and Um,
to, to do it in a way that, uh,
takes full advantage of the fact that these are
not, um, uh kind of uh passive systems that
have to be micromanaged every step of the way,
but in fact, have representations of their goals that
we can access. And so discovering how those goals
are, are encoded, which we have started to do,
and re-specify those goals as a kind of communication
process with the cells, not, not a, not a
micromanagement process. So that's, that, that's a different approach
to regenerative medicine.
So you mentioned cancer there very briefly. How would
this knowledge apply to cancer, not only when it
comes to understanding it, but also potentially treating it?
Yeah. So, so cancer, of course, is, is a
very multifaceted and complex disease, but, but I, I'll,
I'll, I'll boil it down to the kind of,
uh, piece of this that we study. 11 way
to understand cancer as basically in a dissociative identity
disorder of the collective intelligence. So, normally, what you
have in morphogenesis is a large number of cells
that have all bought into the same. A vision
of where they're going in anatomical space. They're maintaining
or building a nice organ, a healthy, you know,
uh, tissues, whatever. What is it that allows all
of them to share that same vision of what
they should be doing? Well, it is a connection
between them, an information processing connection between them, which
is biochemical, bioelectrical and biomechanical, that allows them to
form a network where the network stores a memory
that none of the individual cells can access. And
uh what happens, both during evolution and development is
that cells join into these networks and that allows
them to radically raise their uh uh the cognitive
capacity to be able to store and, and work
on these grandiose projects like making an entire organ,
making a, uh, you know, a limb with, with,
with fingers and all of that. So Once you
think about that, that, uh, that process, it's pretty
obvious that there's going to be a failure mode.
The failure mode is that, is, is what happens
when individual cells disconnect from that network. When an
individual cell disconnects from that network, then What happens
is that it can no longer access the memories
that it that it was working on. The cognitive
light cone shrinks drastically. So whereas before, the size
of the gold that it was working on was
quite large, let's say a liver or something like
that. That was the size of the cognitive lycone.
Single cell disconnects, now it shrinks down to the
size to the, to the kind of uh uh
scale of goals that single cells have. What are,
what do single cells know how to do? Proliferate,
migrate, and, uh, uh, eat as much as it
wants and dump entropy into the environment. And so
that's metastasis. And so what happens then is that
an integrated coherent entity fragments, and its fragments, uh,
roll backwards to a very ancient lifestyle, where, where
as far as they're concerned, the rest of the
body is just outside environment. So what's happened there
is that the boundary between self and world has
shrunk drastically. These cancer cells are not more selfish,
unlike what, um, some, uh, game theory, uh, um,
kind of approaches take. They're, they're not less cooperative.
They're not more selfish. They just have smaller selves.
And so that boundary between self and world can,
can shrink, and that's, and that's cancer. So, that
kind of, that kind of unconventional model of cancer
makes a, makes a very specific prediction. It suggests
that when that happens, You may not necessarily need
to have, you need to kill the cell. You
may not necessarily need to fix the genetic damage
or whatever other kind of and it doesn't have
to be genetic, but whatever other kind of damage
caused that, that problem, it might be fixable by
reconnecting that cell to the rest of, uh, to
the rest of the network. And we've done this
in animal models. We've actually shown this, that if
you put really nasty human oncogenes into a, uh,
into a tadpole embryo, they Will make tumors. But
if you force those cells to remain connected to
the other neighbors, even and, and have an appropriate
bi electrical state, even though, uh, the, the mutation
is very strong, you know, it's very strong and
it's present. You don't kill the cells, you don't
fix the mutation, but there's no, there's no tumor.
You, you, you prevent or, or uh reverse tumorgenesis
because the cells now become part of that network
and they just start working on the thing they
were supposed to be working on. So that's, that,
that idea of, of rescaling the, uh, the anatomical,
um, goals that, that group um groups of cells
work on is a different approach to cancer and
that's what we're doing now. And, and we've moved
from the frog model into uh into the human
uh X vivo tissues and hopefully someday into patients.
Do you think that an understanding of a biological
system as a dynamic system, how it operates at
different scales, and the fact that it has multiple
levels of organization would have implications as to how
we understand causation in biology.
Yeah, I think, I think all of this stuff
impacts uh how we, how we think about causation
because. Well, first of all, the perennial question of
which level of organization is the most causally potent.
So the reductionist view would say that it's the
lowest level. And, uh, this has been an argument
for probably thousands of years now. Now, there's been
some amazing advances in the last few decades where
uh people have actually developed, um, computational models for
asking that question in a very rigorous way. So,
um, And so, so, uh, there, there's, there are
aspects of, uh, information theory now that can actually,
at least for some systems can do the computation
and tell you which level does the most work.
And, uh, it's often not that it's in fact,
sometimes not the lowest level. Uh, SO that's, that's,
that's kind of amazing that that philosophical question has
now been turned into a very, very, uh, very
practical, um, uh, kind of, uh, rigorous calculation that
you can do. And The thing about the, the,
the, to me, the interesting thing about causation is
that what we're looking for is the most efficient
way to interact with the system. We're looking for
ways to change what the system is doing to
uh to, to control it in, in certain cases
or to collaborate with it or, or whatever. And
that means that we have to really understand the
causal architecture of the, of the system. And so,
Uh, my claim is, and much like with, with
neuroscience, you know, the reason that we were able
to train dogs and horses, uh, thousands of years
before we knew any neuroscience is because their causal
architecture has this amazing feature that it enables a
learning interface on the outside, meaning that you can
give rewards and punishments, and you don't have to
know anything that's underneath. The system itself will do
all the other adjustments, meaning adjust all the chemical
processes, the synaptic machinery, the neuronal growths, all, all
that stuff will get adjusted. You don't need to
do it. The system itself will do it all,
all, you can just operate at this, at this
very, very high level. So, um, that's, that's something
that I think is very important to understand about
other aspects of biology that are not about, uh,
conventional behavior and brains and so on, to understand
what kind of interfaces are there that give you
maximal causal purchase on that system, so that you're
not always operating bottom up.
So I want to ask you about a very
interesting article that you wrote on life after death,
and I have two questions about it. So, first,
could you tell us about the thanato transcriptum? And
second, could you tell us about the. THAT we
could have a life cycle where after the death
of multicellular organisms, individual cells would live on or
even reboot multicellularity and aggregate into novel functional anatomical
forms.
Sure, yeah. I mean, so, so that wasn't just
my paper that I was, I was part of
a team that's been working for, for some years
now to understand the thanato transcriptome, which is, is
a very interesting discovery. It turns out that, uh,
at the moment of death, both uh in, in
model systems and in human patients, uh, cells turn
on a whole bunch of new genes. And that,
that's, that's kind of odd because, uh, you know,
why would you be like turning, turning genes off?
Well, genes being turned off at death makes sense
because metabolism is failing and so on, that, that's
pretty obvious. But why, why would cells actually be
turning on genes and leads to all sorts of
interesting questions about purpose and causation. For example, some,
some philosophers wonder, does it even make sense to
say that there's a purpose for them to turn
it on, since they're dying? What could the purpose
be? Uh, I'm, I'm more interested in the fact
that What this is really telling us is again
about this relationship between parts and holes. So, when
the organism dies, in fact, most of the cells
are perfectly fine. And that's, that's an interesting question
as to, uh, first of all, what does it
actually mean for the collective to, to, to quote
unquote die? And, you know, it seems a little
more obvious in, in, um, uh, in. THAN it
does, for example, you know, when you, when you
buy a cabbage and you bring it home and
you put it in your fridge, at what point
do you think it's actually dead, right? That's, that's
not clear at all. And even for humans, what's
considered perfectly dead, uh, you know, 100 years ago
is now a totally solvable problem in, in modern
trauma, trauma medicine in the, in the, in the
emergency room. So, and, and lots of people are
working on different, different types of reanimation and things
like that. So, So I'm interested in this, in
this question of where and how does the collective
uh disband and what, what does that mean for
its individual cells. And I'll tell you a a
a a very specific experimental approach that we've taken
to this. Which um has to do with something
we now call anthrobots. So, it turns out that
uh tracheal epithelial cells from the airway of human
uh donors can be cultured in a particular, uh,
uh, protocol that enables them to self-assemble into a
novel, uh kind of uh configuration. They make this
round little, little thing that has cilia on the
outside, so it swims around. And it's a self
motile little creature that has, uh, you know, uh,
4 different kinds of behavior patterns and lots of
interesting capabilities, including the capability to heal neural wounds
in its vicinity and, and probably much more. Um,
IT'S very, it's a, it's a very interesting little
creature, but the, the other, the other interesting thing
is that the donor may or may not be
alive. So, This is, uh, this is a situation
where the original body, uh, may be quote unquote
dead. The original human owner may be gone, but
the, the cells, and in fact, not just individual
cells, the way we have with, with cell culture
like healer cells and things like that. Not only,
not only the individual cells, but actually there's a
new organism. Um, THERE'S a new kind of creature
that's going to live for, uh, at least 5
weeks, and, uh, the, the original donor may or
may not be alive. So, you know, we can
think that we can, we can talk about life
after death of individual cells and why the cells
are turning on um certain, certain genes. Uh, MY
hypothesis about all of that is that Uh, the
cells are getting ready to go out on their
own. Now, in a, in a mammal, obviously, that's
not going to work because they're in dry air.
And unless there's a, uh, a bioengineer, uh, like,
like, uh, so that's, that's able to take these
cells and bring them into a new environment and
let them become anthrobots or cell culture or something
else, it's not going to work. But I, I
think, I think that reality just hasn't caught up
to them yet. And I think they're doing what,
uh, uh, uh, um, a fish and amphibian cells
could do, which is, you know, if you think
about, if you think about a frog or a,
or a fish dying in a pond somewhere, there's
no particular reason that some of the cells couldn't,
uh, uh, exit the body and live as amoebas,
right? That this is, this is how many different
unicellular organisms live, and they may or may not
come together into a, into a Xenabbo or something
similar later. But at least, at least in principle,
Uh, this, the death of the body does not
mean the death of the cells necessarily. And so
some of that thanat or transcriptome may be cells
that are getting ready for a new life. And
in fact, we've, we've looked at the transcriptome of
the anthrobots, and they transcriptome is radically altered from
the, uh, from, from that of, of their donor
cells. About 9000 genes are differently transcribed. That's about
half the genome. So they have massively different uh
gene expression than uh than the original cells. And
we didn't touch their DNA. We didn't give them
any synthetic biology circuits. We didn't put in any
weird drugs or nanomaterials. It's just a different lifestyle
and the ability to go on when the original
body is dead. And, uh, yeah, I think, I
think, I think cells are pretty, pretty willing to
do that.
Uh, BUT multicellularity can be rebooted afterwards.
Apparently, yeah. I mean, no one, no one would
have, uh, would have known looking at the, at
the standard human genome. Well, first of all, let's
be, let's be clear. Look at the human genome,
if you didn't already know what a human was,
you couldn't know. What the standard pattern is going
to be anyway. But certainly, knowing what a human
is, uh, you would not know that anthrobots would
be possible or would have these specific properties, you
know, specific classes of behavior, uh, with specific transition
probabilities between those behaviors, and then the ability to
heal neural wounds and some other interesting things that
they do. So, so apparently you can reboot multicellularity.
We've done the same thing in, uh, in what
we call Xenabbots. So, these are, um, Uh, these
are similar types of, uh, uh, autonomous biobot structures
that are made from a frog, um, epithelial cells.
And they also, uh, yeah, they also get together
and, and form a different pattern and have, have
behaviors that are distinct from, from their original tissues.
Mhm. And would it be possible for the individual
cells to retain some information from the organism they
were part of?
I, I think it's certainly possible. We haven't shown
it yet. We are, we are doing, uh, experiments
on this. You can imagine, you know, I'll just
give you one version of a very simple one.
LET'S say that you take these tracheal cells from
a donor that was a smoker. So you take
the tracheal cells, they make an anthrobot. Now, you
could ask a simple question. Does the anthrobot move
preferentially towards nicotine, right? Does the anthrobot have similar
addictions that the, that the owner had? And if
you were to take that anthrobot and implant it
into another body, let's say a rat or something
like that, would there be any evidence of the
behaviors, right? I have no idea. I'm not claiming
that this works. We have not shown this yet,
but because of, uh, all kinds of work going
back decades and more recently by um Uh, by
Glanzman and others, uh, showing that, uh, that, that,
that memories can propagate in very, very unusual media
like RNA and things like that. I see, I
see no reason in principle why certain kinds of
memories couldn't move along in tissue.
But then that would mean that some information from
the original organism could be retained after death.
I, I, I, it seems, it seems perfectly possible
to me. I don't, I don't think this has
been, this has been shown yet, but it seems
not impossible.
Great. So, Doctor Levin, before we go, would you
like to tell people where they can find you
and your work on the internet?
Um, SURE, and, and, and maybe, uh, I'll, I'll
give you the actual links you can put it
in the show notes or whatever, but, uh, all
my official stuff is that Uh, drlen.org, one word,
drlen.org. That's my lab website that has all the,
uh, you know, all the peer-reviewed papers, the data
sets, the software, everything else. And, um, if you
want to see my own kind of more personal
thoughts on what all of this means, it's at
a blog called thoughtforms.life, 11 word, thoughtforms.life. And that's,
that's a, that's a blog where I talk about,
uh, what I think these papers mean and some
other things.
Great, I will be leaving links to that in
the description of the interview, and Doctor Levin, thank
you so much again for taking the time to
come on the show. It's been a real pleasure
to talk with you.
I appreciate that. Thanks so much. Yeah, thanks for
having me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan La Jusent and the Samuel
Curriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran
David Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londonorea.
Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine,
Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old
Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernardin Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal N Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.